Interviews are hard,
but until we can learn to read people's thoughts
directly from their brains, they are the single best way to learn about your customers' mindsets,
values, and belief systems. Here are five common mistakes to avoid. Mistake number one, not
building enough rapport. While interviews are a
great way to learn a lot about your customers, we can't just cold call someone and ask: (phone ringing) - Hello? - Hey, this is Therese. Can you tell me about
your mindsets, values, and belief systems? (crickets chirping) You have to build rapport first. This means introducing yourself and even making a little
bit of small talk. While small talk can
sound absolutely dreadful to some people, I think small
talk actually gets a bad rap. It can be an incredible
rapport-building detective tool. Hi, Rachel, nice to meet you - Hey. - So, I'm Therese. I'm the researcher that
will be working with you and I work with NN/g, so thanks so much for taking the time to meet with us. Where are you calling in from, by the way? - Oh, well, normally, I'd be in Milwaukee, but today I am in Chicago. - If the interviewer hadn't asked where they were calling from, they would never have known
that the person was working from somewhere unusual or that they were helping
their family move. Those two pieces of
information can say a lot about what someone might care about. It's easy to go too far
with rapport, though. You mentioned you took a Lyft here. So, are you from the area or? - Yeah, I live in Seattle. - Oh my gosh, I used to live in Kirkland. - Really?
- Yeah. Oh, Seattle's so cool, isn't it? - Yeah. - I guess, Kirkland's
kinda changed a lot I know over the last five years. I'm originally from Jersey
City and over there, it's like every five years,
there's a new building. Yeah, Kirkland, I guess
it's a little more stable, but you know, Seattle is pretty cool. - Yeah. - This conversation got
derailed really fast because the interviewer made it about her own lived experiences rather than that of the interviewee. It's easy to do that when you're trying to be seen as likable or approachable as a person. But don't worry so much about being liked and focus on being an
active listener instead. Mistake number two, not probing enough. Probing questions are questions that help gain specific,
in-depth, follow-up information about a topic. A lot of interviewers will shy
away from probing too much, either because it feels rude to pry or because it makes them look
like they don't know much about the field. - Yeah, the OKRs are really high-priority on the stakeholders' lists right now, so we've been working with
PMs to get the backlog on the APIs all straightened out. - However, playing dumb
is often a good tactic to get more information that otherwise wouldn't
have been offered up freely. Even if you have a good speculation for what some words of phrases may mean, sometimes assumptions are incorrect, so it's worth asking anyway. When you say PMs, that means? Totally the project manager. - Oh, actually, the product manager. Yeah, we use PJM for the project manager, but not everyone uses the right acronym - Can you tell me more about that? - Oh, yeah, the wrong people
reply to emails all the time. It's really annoying. - See? Probing can shed light on problems that you may not have known existed. Mistake number three,
multitasking during the interview. I get it, the texts, the
pings, the calendar reminders, we don't love when these
disrupt an interview. And some of it is unavoidable, even when we mute our devices. But the biggest culprit of multitasking during
interviews, note-taking. Not only are we terrible note-takers when we're facilitating an interview, but it also makes us poor facilitators by taking our eye contact
away from the participant. Instead, delegate
note-taking to someone else and when possible, record your interviews for transcription and analysis later. Mistake number four, allowing observers to influence the interview. An interview is a one-on-one conversation and when people are interested
in observing research, that can be a good thing. While it's not a deal breaker
to have an observer or two, imagine five people staring
at you as you respond. It gets a little scary. And if more than one tries to interject at
the same time, yikes. If you record the interview, that can help avoid some of the issues with too many observers. But nonetheless, you should
share some clear ground rules, like limiting the number
of staff in the room to three people max and have only the
facilitator ask questions. After all, it's the facilitator
who's built the rapport. Last but not least, the most
compromising of all mistakes, number five, leading the participant. Sometimes, researchers
accidentally show their cards and say a little too much, or they phrase a question a certain way which primes the participant
to respond differently, their answers skewed
by researcher behavior. For example, if I were to ask, "How do mobile devices play a role during in-store price comparisons?" this might prime the
participant to give me examples of times they've used their mobile devices to compare prices. But if I were to ask, "How
do you shop for appliances?" we might find very
different user behavior, like forgoing mobile devices or maybe even uncovering new behavior, like researching brand
reputations in advance. So, keep the study's
purpose relatively vague. Keep questions as open-ended as possible and mind your body language as you go. There you have it. If you're interested in
more user interview tactics, check out our full-day course on user interviews at nngroup.com. Good luck.